When I thought I was finally used to how
good DeepSeek is at publishing research,
my mind has yet again been blown away
with how insanely well-crafted this new
paper is. Like, if you want to do good
LM architectural research or just good
ablazion studies, you should just get my
video and straight up read the paper
because there's just no way for me to do
the paper a complete justice. They
wasted no time improving their idea
works with methods so rigorous that it
makes any other architectural related
work published previously look like they
were only doing toy experiments. And not
just the attention to details, but their
desire to remove all the potential
confounding variables that may affect
the research results and drawing proofs
mechanistically to show that this new LM
component doesn't just work, but also
makes sense. A complete research
masterclass. Whoever came up with these
experiments, I mean, no wonder they work
at Deep Seek. So for today's video,
let's take a look at Deep Seek's new
paper called conditional memory via
scalable lookup, a new axis of sparsity
for LMS where they proposed this new
component called engram that is
definitely going to be the second
fundamental architectural upgrade after
MHC which I already have a video on and
I highly recommend you to watch that
video because even though MHC is a brand
new idea, this engram paper has already
implemented MHC under the name
multibranch architecture and shows that
it's just too good not to use it. But
before we dive into it, if you ever
built something that relies on real-time
information from the web, things like
market trackers, alert systems, live
research tools, or even feeding fresh
data into an AI model, you'll probably
discover pretty quickly that the hardest
part isn't building the tool. It's
actually getting the data, captas, rate
limits, dynamic web page. It's never
consistent with most of them, making it
harder for you to automate this process
every day. And this is exactly where
today's sponsor, SER API, comes in. It
provides clean, structured search
results from Google, YouTube, and other
search engines, all delivered in a
simple JSON format. I have done plenty
of legal scraping for projects in the
past, and honestly, having a service
handle that entire layer is amazingly
convenient because all the messy
infrastructure, proxies, blocking,
parsing is handled behind the scenes,
which means you can focus on actually
building the product. It's also
incredibly useful if you're working in
AI or machine learning since you can
easily collect things like titles,
images, links, and even academic
research data through their Google
Scholar API. I wish I had this when I
built my top most cited research paper
list last year, which would have saved
me so much time. So, if you want to
build projects that rely on live search
data like Google, YouTube, and even
more, you should definitely check them
out using the link down in the
description. And thank you SER API for
sponsoring this video. Anyways, with
Deep Sea V4 soon to be upon us, the
amount of technical research that they
are releasing in advance definitely
signals that V4 will contain a lot of
new incredible insights and ideas that
V4 paper will not be able to contain or
will actually prove at scale. And you
can already see this trend in the
Deepseek V3.2 paper where they published
the key innovation deepseek sparse
attention in a paper 2 months earlier.
So, if nothing goes wrong, we are
definitely going to see Engram and MSC
scout up really soon. But contrary to
MSC, Engram is not using a lot of fancy
names in its paper. Yet, it feels
impossible to understand what they mean
just by reading their paper title. Like
some sort of conditional memory that's
like a lookup table in a transformer.
How does that even work? So essentially,
beside the attention and a feed forward
network, they just added a new block
called engram as the third key component
into the transformer. In a vanilla
transformer, we are very familiar with
the intuition that the attention block
functions as a way to connect the
semantic meaning across tokens. For
example, how strongly a token is related
to another. And the feed forward network
block is where the model actually
processes what attention delivers to
them where it turns the relational
signals into meaningful features. Kind
of like a memory that lives in the
weights where it contains patterns it
has seen during training and convert it
into useful internal representations.
But these two blocks within a
transformer layer are pretty much
perfect. Why even bother to add the
third block? Well, the key intuition
here is even if the knowledge is in
[music] the weights, a transformer still
has to reconstruct its meaning at
runtime. If the knowledge is represented
in one token, it doesn't make that much
of a difference. But when the knowledge
is spread across a few tokens, like a
common phrase, boilerplate syntax, or
even formatting patterns, the model ends
up needing to spend some compute to
build up a representation of that
multi-token phrase before it could be
used downstream. And this process kind
of gets redundant because the model has
to redo that feature construction every
time the same multi-token pattern shows
up. Let's say there's a sentence, this
photo contains Diana, Princess of Wales.
In a vanilla transformer, when the model
arrives at Wales, it doesn't instantly
register the meaning of Diana, Princess
of Wales. Instead, it gradually composes
the meaning from Wales being a country
in the United Kingdom to the actual
person, Diana, first wife of Prince
Charles, all through the layers of
attention, plus feed forward network
transformations that would create a
feature which will reliably behave like
a single entity later down the
transformer layers. With Deep Seek's
proposed engram, however, when the model
gets the token whales, it will instantly
recognize that it is a common phrase of
a famous historical person and directly
outputs that representation of this
person and fuse it back into the main
information stream, skipping the compute
effort, puzzling together that this
multi-token phrase behaves like a single
well-known entity. Which brings us to
the major idea that Deepseek is pushing
in this paper, conditional compute and
conditional memory. Conditional compute
is thee short for a mixture of experts
that we are all decently familiar with.
You basically have a large pool of
expert parameters for the feed forward
network block and for any given token
you only activate a small subset. The
model spends compute selectively where
it matters. But on the other hand,
conditional memory is the engram that
Deepseek is proposing. Instead of
activating experts, you selectively
retrieve stored representations from a
big lookup table based on the local
multi-token pattern. The lookup table
can be huge, but it stays cheap and
constant time because it's a hashed
lookup. And in hindsight, these two seem
very similar because they both save
compute by only touching a subset of
parameters each step. But Deepseek is
saying here that there's a major
distinction between the two, big enough
that they should be treated as two
different axis of sparity. Most
importantly, conditional compute is
about which expert weights you run. And
conditional memory is about which piece
of stored information you fetch. So the
expert weights help with context
dependent computation like things that
genuinely require context aware
processing like reasoning while engram
helps with fast recall of mostly static
patterns that otherwise would have
gotten reconstructed redundantly across
layers. And by cleanly separating these
two ideas, a new way to optimize ALMs
have emerged. So now you don't have to
dump your entire sparse parameter budget
into experts and pray they learn
everything. You can allocate some of
that budget to a memory pathway that's
explicitly designed to handle the static
lookup part of language and leave to
fully do the thinking in that framing.
Engram doesn't feel out of place
anymore. It starts to look like a
missing component that should have
always been there. But how does engram
actually work at the technical level?
because it seems a bit elusive trying to
fit this seemingly delicate idea into
the model. Well, there has already been
other engrams related modeling approach,
but none of them really come close to
how DeepS seek applied the engrams idea
into the model as most of them were at
the front of the pipeline either as
features for a classifier or as a way to
build an input representation rather
than something that lives inside the
transformer as a key component. So, if
you step back, this is a very bold of
deepseek. Intuitively, you can think of
it as a module that repeatedly does four
things. Step one, it watches the token
stream as the model reads left to right
and at every position, it looks at the
local tail of what it has just seen. So,
in engram's case, where the engram is
two and three, it looks at both the last
two and three tokens disregarding if
they are a phrase or not. Step two, it
uses that short phrase as an address in
a giant memory. And as you cannot store
a onetoone entry for every possible
phrase, engram here uses a hashing
approach where the phrase gets mapped
into a few slots in a big table. It then
pulls out the vectors sitting in those
slots. And if the multi token is
actually a common phrase or pattern,
then this vector will contain a rich
representation. But if it's meaningless,
it would just be noisy. Step three, the
model would take in a hidden state at
that layer which will contain the
contextual information and a
contextualized gating mechanism would
use that as a filter to see if this
retrieve pattern actually makes sense.
So if the retrieve vector is useless or
if the retrieve vector is meaningful but
does not actually make sense in the
context, the gating will make the
feature signal very weak and in step
four, the feature would get fused back
into the mainstream and the transformer
would continue as normal. But now it
begs the question, how does the model
learn to do all this? Interestingly,
engram is trained end to end, which
means the model would just actually pick
it up with how common certain
multi-token patterns would show up
again. Since the lookup is
deterministic, these patterns would be
repeatedly mapped into the same slots in
the table. And when these slots receive
consistent gradient updates during
training, the vectors stored within it
start to become genuinely meaningful. So
when retrieved during inference, they
aren't complete noise. The
contextualized gating mechanism would
also learn a very simple yet powerful
technique where when the retrieve vector
consistently helps in the context the
gate would be open more often and when
its noise or when it clashes with the
current context the gate will learn to
be shut. So we end up with frequent
visits to the common patterns that would
make the vectors residing there better
and the better vectors give the gate a
reason to selectively rely on them and
all these are learned by the model
implicitly. Amazing right? Another
important fact is engram isn't applied
in every transformer layer. Instead,
they treat engram as something you
insert as specific layers because where
you inject the multi-token features
matters a lot. And you don't need too
many engram blocks because if you think
about it, injecting the meaning ones is
probably enough. And logically, adding
engram in early layers should be the
best because that's where the
transformer is still trying to puzzle
together the multi token meaning. And
having engram there can potentially
offload it before the model burns
through a bunch of layers just to do the
exact thing. But if you put it too
early, the contextualized gating
mechanism may have signals that are too
weak to be even useful. Like in layer 1,
the hidden state doesn't have much
information yet. So it doesn't have
enough global context to decide whether
the retrieved memory is actually
relevant or not. So through their
ablation study, they found that having
engram at layer 2 is the best as that
gave the lowest loss out of inserting it
at all other layers. But interestingly,
they found that placing engrams at layer
2 and six performs even better after
their more complicated sweep. This
design seemingly balances the model with
the benefits of early intervention while
having better late stage contextualized
gating as the hidden state in layer 6
would have better contextual
information. So, the baseline for figure
4 is actually engram being inserted at
two layers instead of just one. And if
you look to the right where it says
ablation variations, you can see how
much the performance degrades for each
mechanism that they introduced to make
engram better but being taken out with
the most degradation being not using the
multibranch architecture which is the
MHC that Deep Seek recently introduced.
Can you believe that it's making this
much impact already? This is an
interesting one too because engram plus
MHC creates this multi- view of the same
lookup but can be filtered differently
where each branch can decide in its own
way how much to trust the retrieved
memory. And without MHC there would only
be one branch which apparently would
perform a lot worse. Aside from that
they also have to use token compression
which just basically means mapping raw
token IDs into canonical ids like making
words all in lowercase or just
semantically equivalent forms. Removing
the gating mechanism will also create a
large impact because the lookup can be
noisy and this just shows how important
the contextualized gating mechanism is.
While all these I just talked about is a
good way to interpret the ablazion
studies. Deep sea researchers still went
the extra mile to prove that it's not
just a convenient interpretation but
something you can actually see happening
inside the network. Here they use a
probe called logit lens to observe the
model mechanistically where at every
layer you take the model's hidden state
and ask if I force the model to predict
the next token right now what would it
predict then you compare that layer's
early guess to the model's final guess
at the last layer using KL divergence as
a measurement. So lower KL indicates
that a layer is already close to the
final answer. And what they found is
that engram models get close to their
final prediction earlier in the network
especially in the early layers. As you
can see, the lower KL appears sooner,
which matches the claim where engram
injects a useful local pattern early, so
the backbone doesn't have to spend as
many layers slowly assembling those
features, leaving later layers more room
for the harder contextual dependent
work. But the researchers weren't done.
They wanted to double down on the
interpretation. So, they also did a
representation level test using a CKA
similarity heat map. How it works is
that it takes the hidden states from
every layer of engram and every layer of
thee baseline and measure how similar
their representation geometry is. If a
layer in engram is doing about the same
kind of work as a layer ine baseline
with the same depth on the heat map, you
would expect the brightest region to sit
near the diagonal. But what they observe
is an upward shift off the diagonal.
Because for many layers, an engram layer
looks more similar to a deeper layer
with engram layer 5 aligning best with
arounde layer 12, which kind of implies
that engram's shallow layers are
functionally closer to deeper layers of
thee baseline, which can be interpreted
like engram is increasing the model's
depth without actually adding layers.
Anyways, so now that engram's
effectiveness is actually proven
practicalitywise,
how should it be utilized? To start off,
we have two directions that we could
look into. What's the best balance of
Engram and MOE under a fixed budget? And
how crazy can we scale Engram if budget
is not a concern? For a fixed budget,
they did a sweep under the same amount
of compute flops. And right off the bat,
a puree model is the most inefficient
with the highest loss. And as you
allocate more to engram whereby reducing
the total number of routed experts while
keeping the active compute per token the
same. They found that the best point is
when roughly 20 to 25% of the sparse
capacity is moved from into engram.
Improving the loss by around 0.8% for
110 billion parameter model. As to how
crazy you can scale it, a fascinating
thing about engram is that making the
engram table larger only increases
stored parameters and not per token
compute. Because engram only performs a
constant hasht lookup and a fixed size
fusion. So however big the table is
doesn't really matter. So by just
scaling the hash table, they see the
loss keep improving as the table grows
up to an extra 13 billion parameters
which is the largest size they have
tested in this paper. And the trend
seems to scale linearly while improving
the model's math encoding capabilities.
Not only that, when you take out the
engram component from a trained model,
you can see how much the performance
deteriorates, especially for tasks
related to factual knowledge and
algorithmic thinking, dropping up to
56%. With tasks like reading
comprehension retaining some
performance, pretty much shows that
engram is actually carrying a lot of
weight for the stored knowledge domain
rather than just being a minor helper.
So, if engrams this good, there must be
some tradeoffs, right? maybe inference
gets slower or more expensive. Well,
actually since the lookup addresses are
deterministic within engram once the
token sequence is known the hash indices
for the lookup would all be fixed. So
the system can prefetch the needed
features asynchronously. So while layer
1 is doing the pass the prefetching can
already be started so that when layer 2
needs engram it's pretty much ready and
can be transferred in over PCIe in their
benchmark a 100 billion parameter engram
table that is entirely CPU offloaded in
hosted DRAM the throughput penalty is
actually really tiny a 1.9% slowdown on
a 4 billion parameters model and 2.8% 8%
slowdown on a 8 billion parameters
model. So with how insane engram is, the
next step is definitely see in action at
a large scale, which Deep Seek V4 should
implement. So hopefully by now you
understand the hype that I have for V4
because this many new innovations
already is definitely about to be a
crazy model drop. And if you like how I
explain the AI concepts today, you
should definitely check out my latest
project intuitive.academy Academy where
it contains an intuitive explanation of
modern MS including and engrams from the
ground up. This is a series where I'll
break down AI topics intuitively because
I genuinely think anyone could
understand them no matter how difficult
it may seem. It currently has over 24
chapters and I plan to add a new one at
least once a month. So for those who
want to get into AI or LMS, this should
be the perfect place for you to dive
into the technical parts without being
intimidated by crazy looking maths. And
right now I'm also putting out an early
bird discount. So you can use the code
early for 40% off a yearly plan. And
thank you guys for watching. A big shout
out to Spam Match, Chris Ladoo, Degan,
Robert Zaviasa, Marcelo Ferraria, Poof,
and Enu DX Research Group, Alex Midwest
Maker, and many others that support me
through Patreon or YouTube. Follow me on
Twitter if you haven't and I'll see you
in the next